In this video, we're
going to look at
unpivoting data in
the Query Editor,
and troubleshoot
common query errors.
In the previous video,
we did a great job of
condensing and
transforming our data
into something more manageable.
But for those of you who
tried the challenge, I said,
you probably found
it was still quite
difficult to get
analytics from this data.
That's because it's in
a form we call pivoted.
What do we mean by pivoted?
Well these values, five, four,
three, two, one, are ratings.
We would actually expect to see
those as values in a column that
instead they're being shown as
column headings in
their own right.
This is quite a common problem.
What typically happens
in business is
we start with data
that is flattened.
You can see each month is shown
as a value in the column.
But then, to make this
data easier to read,
somebody will create
a pivot table to show
us a breakdown of
expenses by month.
The pivot table looks like this,
as a report that's
much easier to read.
But the problem is the original
flattened data sometimes
gets lost and this is very
hard to do analytics with.
What we're looking at is
how can we get from the
pivoted back to the flattened?
We can do that with Query Editor.
Back in our data, we're going
to need to edit the query,
so we're going to come
to our data ribbon,
click Queries and Connections,
and double click our Evals Query.
The first thing we need
to decide is which
columns do we need to unpivot.
In this case, it's our
ratings from five to one.
You actually have a choice,
you can select the columns
you want to unpivot,
or you can select the columns
you don't want to unpivot.
It might sound counter intuitive,
but you're actually better off
selecting the columns you
don't want to unpivot.
That's because the
columns you want
to unpivot are more
likely to change.
We're going to
select from course,
hold our "Shift" key
down to questions,
and then we're going to
come to our Transform tab;
and we're going to find the
Unpivot Columns button.
But we're going to click the drop
down because the
option we actually
want to use is Unpivot
Other Columns.
If we selected the columns
we wanted to unpivot,
then we would say
Unpivot Columns.
We're going to choose
unpivot other columns.
How easy was that?
We probably don't want
to call the column
Attribute THOSE edit out
M code, we're going
to call that rating.
We don't need the
value column at all,
so I'm just going to select
the value column
and press "Delete".
We're now ready to
close and load,
so back to our Home ribbon,
and close and load.
That data is going to be
much easier to work with.
If you're working
with 2016 or earlier,
you may find your table rows
wouldn't actually cleaned up.
That's very easy to fix,
we're going to select
column E to I,
come to Home ribbon, and
just press "Delete".
Now let's try doing the analysis.
We would like to
get a chart showing
the average rating to each
of the trainer questions,
and the best way to do
it is a pivot table.
Now on the table data,
you just click on it and
come up to Table Design.
You'll see the
tables called Evals,
I'm going to use
that in a moment.
Can you come to your
evaluation report worksheet?
Make sure you clicked in C four,
we're going to
insert pivot table,
and we're going to get
it from the Evals table,
and just press "Enter".
The first field we
want is our questions,
so I'm going to grab questions,
drag and drop it into the rows,
and you'll see each
unique question
is represented as a row label.
Now I want my ratings.
I'm going to grab
ratings, drag it
and drop it into values.
But it's giving me a count
and I don't want to count,
I want an average.
If you right-click on
one of those ratings,
come down to summarize values by,
we're going to choose average.
Ooh dear, we have a problem.
Let's come back to
our original data and
see if we can see
what the issue is.
All the numbers are sitting on
the left-hand side of the cell,
and that's your first big clue,
that's probably not a number,
it's probably texts;
better go check our query.
I'm going to double-click
into my query,
you can see the rating
is in fact still text,
we're going to need
to change that.
Can you select the rating column?
We're going to come up
to our Home ribbon,
find Data Type Text,
and we're going to change
that to whole number,
we're going to click close and
load, that's looking better.
Back in our evaluation report,
we just need to come up
to Pivot Table Analyze,
and hit the Refresh
button, problem solved.
We do need to tidy
this up a little bit,
so let's just right-click
on one of our ratings,
come to number format.
I'm going to make that a
number and click "Okay".
We also only want questions
about the trainer,
so let's add a filter.
I'm going to come to row
labels, click the drop-down,
come to label filters,
and we want everything that
contains the word trainer.
You're going to click contains,
type trainer, and press "Enter",
and there's our
finished analysis.
But it's always easier to
absorb information that's
represented graphically.
Let's convert this to a chart.
Clicking in our Pivot Table,
we're going to come up
to our Analyze tab,
click Pivot chart,
and click "Okay".
Now we can actually
move that chart to
cover our Pivot Table
because we don't need both,
and we'll make a
few updates to it;
so on the Design ribbon,
let's grab a style
that looks nice.
We definitely don't
need the legend,
so click that off.
We do need a proper title,
so let's triple
click in there and
we're going to call
this trainer feedback.
I'd like to put a border on it,
so on the format within
let's stick a nice
blue border on it.
Back on the analyze tab,
let's switch off
field buttons off,
so that's looking great.
One more little finishing touch,
let's fix now report heading.
Clicking into B1, you'll see
I've started the formula,
but we now need to finish it off.
At the end we're going
to type an ampersand,
which is our join or
concatenate operator.
Then back in our
evaluations ribbon,
we're going to click on
the first course name,
and I'm going to press "Enter".
That was pretty straightforward,
but I still don't
want to have to do
this process every time
I need to do an
evaluation report.
The question is, can we
reuse this query for
other evaluations?
The answer is, yes, we can.
All we need to do is
change the source data.
Again, really easy to do.
We're going to come back to
our Evals query and double-click.
If you come to the first
step which says source,
you can either come into
the M code and just
modify it there.
If you've got the new version,
you can click Data
Source Settings,
or if you come to
the applied steps,
you'll see a little
[inaudible] source,
you can click on that.
Now all I need to do is
browse to find the new file.
I'm going to click
the Browse button.
This time I want to see the
Excel Advanced feed backs,
I'm going to double-click
on that, click "Okay".
Now it's worth double checking
that everything's worked,
because if the data is
slightly different,
the query may actually
throw out an error.
Let's just come and
check the last step.
Yes, we have a problem.
Now it's telling you it had
a problem doing a
data conversion.
I have a hunch that the
problem is our Changed Type,
and when I come and
remove that step,
that was one of those
automated steps added for me,
and I do want to delete
it, so I'm going
to click "Delete".
When I come back to my last step,
that has fixed the problem.
Do watch out for
those Changed Types,
generally a good
idea to remove them.
That's all nicely fixed,
I'm going to click
close and load,
come back to my
evaluation report,
and again you will
need to refresh,
so just click on your chart,
come up to pivot chart,
analyze, and hit refresh.
There is our report for
Excel Advanced, really
powerful stuff.
In this video we saw how
we could unpivot data.
In the next video,
we're going to do the reverse
procedure and see how we
can use the Query Editor
to pivot our data.